Long-time Mac developer's apps pulled from Mac App Store because of automated system failure

Apple has now apologized for an error that caused developer Charlie Monroe's apps to stop working, despite still being available on the Mac App Store.Charlie Monroe has told AppleInsider that the issue has been resolved. "Apple just called and apologized for the complications," he said. "The issue was caused by my account being erroneously flagged by automated processes as malicious and was put on hold."Monroe's macOS and iOS apps were unable to run for over 12 hours. The original story, as first reported by AppleInsider, follows.

App Store kills developer's appsAs Apple continues to face controversy over its App Store policies and fees, software developer Charlie Monroe has told AppleInsider that the company has killed all his apps with no warning. Each of his ten macOS apps, and two that are also iOS, remain available to buy in the App Store, but Apple has stopped them launching."I woke up this morning only to find a full inbox of issues that my apps can't be launched and are crashing on launch," Monroe said in a message to AppleInsider. "Looking into it, I found that Apple revoked my distribution certificates, which generally kills the apps remotely.""When I sign in to my developer account, it asks me to enroll to the Apple developer program and I don't seem to be in the Apple developer program anymore," he continued, "even though the apps that I have on the App Store are still available."

He says there was no prior warning, nor any explanation from Apple since. "No one wrote to me any reasoning, no one called me, no one warned me prior to the certificate revocation."Monroe says that he has tried all available ways open to developers of contacting Apple, but that none have worked, including telephone support that is supposed to be the quickest. "They offer contact by phone," he explains, "you fill your number, they say they'll call within a minute and nothing happened, no one called and it's been over six hours.""It's not normal that you wake up one day with your business gone with no explanation or any warning," he says.About eight and a half hours after he first learned of the problem, Monroe says he has finally managed to contact Apple."Got through to someone who said they know nothing about [it] and will escalate this to their internal team who will contact me further," said Monroe.